So we're off to our last two sessions with
a great lineup of speakers.
But before we get to that, we'll start
with a quiz with the audience.
Okay. So first question is this.
Please raise your hand andthen you can
open your microphone if you know where
the QR code
for the feedback form is.
I see there in orange. Do you want to turn
on your mic and tell us?
Or is she showing it? Okay.
So if anyone wants to fill out the form
go to her or you can also go to the doors
when
you're exiting, you have those on both
sides.
Another question
what can you do if you're having a hard
time hearing what the speakers
are saying, raise your hand if you know
the answer.
Over here. Excellent. Use one of the ear
pieces.
And also we have tons of space here now.
So feel free to come closer.
All right. It's time.
So let's,I'm going to head in and
I'm going to be giving the microphone to
my dear colleague
Philippo, WHO is going to be moderating in
the next session.
Over to you, Philippo. Thanks, Papi.
Hi, everyone.
I know thatwe are among the last things
between you andthe reception,so do bear with
us
but you're going to have a very
interesting and
exciting session called open agents
governing
the next generation of autonomous AI
systems
and this session will cover how AI agents
are already capable of planning, acting,
executing tasks autonomously across digital
environments, and what are the challenges
and opportunities of AI agents, of course,
from also an open source perspective
andwhat are,what is the meaning and
the opportunities
of international cooperation on AI agents.
And of course you'll hear fromdifferent
perspectives on this
but without any further ado,let
me give the floor to the opening keynote,
Ted Style of Professor David Schreer, WHO's
a professor of practice at the Imperial
College of London,and somuch more than this
but
it told me not to say the introduction,so
Professor Schreer,please
you have the floor.
Thank you so much. Can you hear me okay?
Is this better? All right.
Hi.
So,I'll try andkeep this moving quickly
sothat we can get to the panel
what I'm going
to speak to you aboutto tee things up is
something called intelligence capital and
how
we create the agent-based enterprise.
Around the turn of the year, I was updating
some work I had done a few years ago with
the investment bank Evercore on valuing
the hyperscalers and
valuing all the AI companies
because we were all scratching our heads and
saying, why are they worth so much money?
This doesn't make sense based on sort of
rational norms of valuation.
We dug in a little more andrealized that
the old way of looking at things was not
how the
world was turning and that we were
entering a new era.
As I dove deeper down the rabbit hole,I
came back withintelligence capital
which I shared
first at Devos andtoday we're going to go
a little deeper into
how it plays out at the
enterprise.
The basic idea, next slide, is that value
creation is no longer coming from looking at
a stream of future cash flows, which is
how we used to value companies.
Instead, we are looking at a stream of
future intelligence flows.
This is something we call intelligence
capital.
For the first time, we have an asset that
increases in value the more you use it.
So this iPad, as soon as I took it out of
the box, it started losing value, it began
depreciating. As soon as I used it more,
it lost more value.
But intelligence, the more you use it, the
more it's worth.
And this is true for human intelligence as
much as artificial intelligence or, and this
is what we'll talk about today, these hybrid
systems where you combine people and agents
to generate disproportionate return.
So you take that unit of a person and an
agent together and you give it a process.
You make it own a process and you have it
go out and capture knowledge and learning,
refine knowledge and learning, and then
compound that knowledge.
So in technical terms,you could kind of
think of that
as like retrieval augmented generation.
But you improve the value of that
knowledge as you're using it.
And if you set up a portfolio of these
little units of people andagents together
you can
generate massive economic returns.
I'm going to dive in a little deeper on
this.
But the important takeaway here is that
the objective of the enterprise is no
longer to
sort of maximize cash flows, but instead
to maximize intelligence flows.
Unfortunately, as people are playing around
with AI these days, they're proudly touting
their AI adoption rates. That is a vanity
metric.
We should not be looking at that.
We should be looking at what are the
intelligence flows that
the organization is creating.
Next slide.
So if you go back to
you may or may not have heard of something
called the theory of the
firm.
Ronald Coss came out with this idea of how
to organize companies and sort of based on
the German general staff model.
So in the 1930s,late 1930s,he proposed
this theory of the firm where
he had a CEO at the
top andhe had this organizational
hierarchy with
people in different functional specialties
and little boxes underneath the functional
leaders.
Well, that's the old way of doing things.
In the era of intelligence capital,instead
you organize around a portfolio of these
little
units that we call intelligence capital
generators.
And you're constantly running thousands of
experiments.
Most of them fail. Some of them succeed
and generate disproportionate returns.
You get what's called a power law curve of
returns.
It's a new way to organize a company.
Now mind you, or any kind of enterprise,
doesn't have to be a for profit enterprise.
Now mind you,this idea of like a liquid
labor market where
people are in these little pods
is actually not new.
Everyone fromUnilever to Valve software
have been playing around withthis for
20 years.
What's different is the RISE of the human
agent system and having that be that sort of
unit of productivity. Next slide.
So what that
looks like is you put a human in an agent
inside something we call an intelligence
capital engine. By the way, all of this is
at intelligencegenerators.com.
So you can download the slides there and
there's also a white paper.
But you have this little intelligence
capital engine thatcaptures knowledge and
learning
defines it, and then compounds it as it's
being used.
Take that engine and stick it in something
we call an intelligence capital generator.
What is a generator? A generator owns a
defined business process.
It retains memory and feedback.
It improves its unit economics over time.
And this is something my colleague Tricia
Wang is going to speak about,I think
on the
panel a little bit. It operates under
audible control.
You have something called proof of
control.
As we start to deploy these agents andthese
agent human systems out in the world
we need
to make sure that we have strong assurance
that they were doing what they're supposed
to do and not doing what they're not
supposed to do.
So next slide,you take a bunch of these
generators andyou stick them into
a portfolio of these
constantly regenerating experiments.
And so now intelligence capital in your
firm is governed as a portfolio.
And the kind of people that
you have have to be trained on how to
operate in this more
liquid fluid environment
which kind of looks like a well-run open
source community in
its dynamics.
And as I was thinking about that for this
week in particular in this conversation, I
was thinking aboutin the intelligence
capital economy
what is the role of open source?
We are here in the United Nations.
193 countries are right now trying to
navigate between Shilla andSharbitis
trying to navigate
between the U. S. and China AI systems.
Open source provides a third way.
Next slide.
Open source provides us an opportunity to
explore sovereign intelligence in a way
beneficial
for humanity.
And with that, I'm going to turn things back
to our moderator and I think we're going
to get the panel started.
So I'm David Schreier with Imperial
College.
If you go to aicollab.org,we've got a
number of white papers on sovereign AI
on intelligence
capital, a little more on our work at
Imperial.
Thank you so much.
And I will now go and explore while I go
back on stage what this third way could look
like and helping us explore again what open
source can do for AI agents and vice versa.
Let me introduce the panel.
Shara Hooker,she is the chief executive
officer at Adaption AI and
former vice president
of cohere where she led queer labs.
So welcome on stage.
And we have Yongwaleen,she's the vice
president,CTO
the Beijing Academy of Artificial
Intelligence
formerly the director of IBM China
Research Lab.
Going to the UN colleagues,Mostafa Alcardi
senior cybersecurity solution officer are
UNNICC.
That is the UN International Computing
Center in Valencia and
the co-chair of the open source
community of practice.
Last butnot least,Tricia Wang
she's the chief executive officer of
advanced AI society
and she's a public interest technologist.
And of course, David, welcome back on
stage.
So to start with,I think we will go in the
order of coding and
I will invite you to share
in three minutes some observational
reflection of what we heard fromDavid and
on the topic
of this panel and then we will go back and
forth with some follow-up questions.
And you should be able to, I think this is
a very needed forum.
Although I just learned thatFilippo,a
moderator
is not the very UN in his support of World
Cup teams since Italy didn't make it, he's
not supporting anyone.
But it's fantastic. Let me maybe kick
things off.
I like to make things relevant.
This conversation is bringing together
stakeholders andpeople WHOcare about
open source.
For that,it's a lot aboutWHO gets to own
technology and
WHO gets to shape intelligence.
My career as a computer scientist, I feel
like I've done my tour of duty at different
frontier labs. I was at DeepMind and then
I led the research arm at Cohere.
For the last 10 years,the dynamic has been
such as
came across actually in your slides
that you place immense amounts of capital
and you build the biggest model.
And in fact,the primary ingredient of
progress for
the last 10 years was scaling model size.
What's quite refreshing about this moment
and this panel is that I wrote a grumpy paper
about this which was late last year, the
slow death of scaling.
So scaling model size is largely, I would
say, at its end as a formula.
Instead, so much of progress is going to
be how a model interacts with the world.
And why does this matter for this
gathering?
The dynamics are completely different.
So for pre-training, you need massive
amounts of compute.
You need to co-locate it in the same place
because
you don't want to distribute across
data centers and there's massive various
entry.
Most rate of return for compute, where you
get bang for your buck, is now moving into
post-training. It's moving to interaction
with the world.
It's moving to a gentic.
This is a way more distributed form of
compute and you can get much more with less.
Why that's interesting is thatwe often end
up in these rooms kind of gloomy about
like
all the state of open source and WHO can
shape.
But the dynamics are shaping are
completely changing.
I would also say another reason why I care
deeply about
this topic of how does a gentic
shape WHO gets access is that there's
another component to this.
One of the things that's really accelerating
is how we do scientific innovation.
One of the things thatwe're working on is
how do we train models thatlearn from
researchers
how they can be optimized?
One of the biggest obstacles to sovereign
AI, to people owning AI, is the know-how,
which is currently concentrated in a
handful of labs.
And a lot of what we're doing even
withauto scientists and
other projects is how can we
empower innovation cycles that are much
faster outside of this handful of labs.
And so there's a few themes there, but one
I would say the barriers to entry of people
shaping innovation has dramatically
changed over the last two years.
People are not going to fore-accessize
their model anymore.
And the second is we're actually learning
how to learn, which means that we can really
give people the possibility of shaping
their AI outside of these labs.
But with that, let me pass on WHO is next.
This is Yung Hwa from Beijing Academy of
AI.
For our institute
we are the nonprofit institute focused on
all the whole stack of AI research
from the model to the data, aeration, and
AI compute.
And all of our things actually are the
open source.
So back to the Davis talk, I think it's
very impressive.
And I also feel that the people might notice
that he mentioned sometime, currently for
AI have the two very important cameras and
China and US, right?
So actually, we also noticed that we also
want in the global, we don't need to do these
kinds of tools,choice,and we can benefit
all the outcomes from
these different countries.
So currently on one way is the model,
right?
The model fromthe different countries,they
change the model and
open source the model.
So the people, you can choose any model
you want.
So that's the one way through the open
source, you already can solve that.
But on the other hand, you might also need
to think about how to run the model on the
different hardware, and really today the
computer resource is very expensive.
And also for different countries, including
the US, Europe, and also China, different
countries, they're also building their
hardware.
So on the other hand,the people might also
think aboutwhich hardware should I buy
right
from which country. So we also want people
don't need to make this hard decision.
So that's why we also built a stack, open
source stack called FLATOS.
That is to allow the different model can
run on different hardware without any
coding.
So we actually have the tool, can allow the
model download, and if that model changed
on some US devices,then throughthe tool
it can very easily migrate on to the
different
hardware,which generates or built
fromChina,or on the other hand
the model if it changed
on the hardware from the China, and it can
migrate on to the US or, for example, a media
hardware.
So that means that for the user today, you
don't need to struggle, we also don't want
you to struggle on the choose which
countries technology.
We also want the AI to be inclusive.
Thank you so much. Let's go in order,
please.
Thank you.
Yeah,so I think this is a really
interesting time,I agree withSarah
that there's a lot
of room forinnovation right now,and
especially whenI hear about
David's talk on intelligence
capital andsaying this is the future
and we're all going to be yielding all
this benefits
from intelligence capital, but I think the
most important thing we have to figure out
is thatno one's going to want to
participate in this world if we don't trust
and we don't
have a way to figure out how do I know
this agent is acting on my behalf?
And thatmy behalf can be an enterprise,it
could be an individual
it could be a nation
state,it could be a government,and I think
this is the most important thing that
we have
to figure out,and at the Advanced AI
Society,our mission and
our purpose is to make sure
that as an industry association, building
out the public goods for verifiable AI, that
this is one of the key pieces thatare
missing fromthe story right now
because there's
a lot of discussion on we need responsible
AI or ethical AI, or AI for good, but all
this is about what AI should do instead
of, well, what can AI do right now?
And there's all this incredible technology
that's been developed in the
decentralized
tech space, or in cryptography, that is a
really latent market that can be applied to
making AI secure, because the biggest thing
that's missing right now is all this like
kind of hype over AI,we're not really
talking enough aboutAI security and
the need for
us to trust,and forus to trust AI,verification
is at the basis,it's a precondition
fortrust
that we have to be able to know how do we
verify this AI did what it said it was
going
to do,and right now we live in a
claims-based AI world where
you don't really know that
the AI did what you wanted to do, you know,
it's based on assertions, that's how these
models work,and what we need to move
intois a verification-based world where
it's based
on evidence,and thatevidence
actually the most tamper-resistant kind is
cryptographic.
In cryptography is a really,I think it's
going to have its moment right now
we usually
cryptographers andcybersecurity leaders
have been left out of the conversation when
it
comes to innovation, because usually people
are scared, you know, like engineers are
scared to talk to the cybersecurity people
becausethey're seen as
a no people or locking
down the perimeter,but now I think the
cybersecurity industry,what their job is
you know,is
in order to make agents useful andvaluable
and they have to figure out how do you
decrease
the risk,but foran agent to be useful,you
have to be multi-cloud
you have to be multi-vendor
and so
the job of right now of cybersecurity is
to figure out how do we make AI secure
and one of the greatest toolboxes, and the
tools that we're seeing from the companies
that are, the innovations are coming from
companies that are adopting verifiable AI,
which means that you have cryptographic, you
know, security at the core, that's one of
the core pieces,and the reason why this
industry is soimportant as
a latent market is that
cryptography has really figured out, how do
you share, how do you verify a fact, how do
you verify something happened without
releasing all the information
and this is going to
be super important now,which is if you
want your intelligence to be shared
to be used
in any way, you need to be able to move that
intelligence, right, that intelligence has
to be portable,your agent has to go
andlike move intoother clouds and
vendors or spaces
or other nations,other,you know,warehouses
to do stuff
but you need to be able to confirm
you know, the agent's identity, you know,
it's privacy, WHO authorized it to do that,
what was the chain of delegation, what was
the agent's provenance, well, all of these
things are now being solved through
all of these various mechanisms using
cryptographic
means, through ledger, distributed means,
decentralized means, so I'm really excited
to,I think this is like one of the most
exciting moments for
open source is to actually think
about now,not just like open data or open
standards andopen hardware
but this is really
I think the moment to shift into,to expand
open source intothinking about
open verification
and that verification has to be open, you
know, it cannot just be like anyone saying,
well, I can verify that because
verification cannot belong to the verified.
Thank you, Mustafa.
Listening to David's presentations
today,the one thing that
kind of struck me the most
is the idea of the intelligence
the intelligence harnessing components of
your framework.
I believe,I believe this is actually one
of the most critical components that
most enterprises
will eventually realize.
I think every agent,first of all,I want to
separate AI models fromagents from
anything
else. I'm only talking about agents right
now.
The part that struck me the most is, it's
true that every agent on its own, working
on different things,building their own
memory in a way that
they are not talking to each
other.
But if you have that close, self-evolving
loop, eventually this harnessing of all those
different intelligence sources intoone
becomes even bigger and
stronger than the total of
all the components of it.
So this is key and
I think this is going to be one of the
most critical design patterns.
When you're talking aboutagents in the
workforce moving forward
I think there's already some
of this in the market today, but this is
going to become the future norms.
Another area that I wanted to kind of
highlight here is open source.
We are an open source suite and
open source is actually an opportunity to
solve some of
the problems of the AI world.
One of the biggest issues was the
transparency of AI.
How do we know that
the logic or the code behind the blocks is
actually doing something
for our benefit as individuals or also as
an enterprise?
So open source basically is transparency.
So you open the box and you let everybody
inspect and see what's in there to make sure
and you can trust the system.
This is key.
The more we work with agents over time,
the more we need to actually trust it.
If you are not able to trust the system
you most likely will not use it or you'd
be hesitant
to use it in sensitive areas.
Was that I think those two points is key.
David, do you want to say a couple of
words?
Yeah,so just to pick up on Mustafa's point
I think the question of orchestration is
going
to be one of the most interesting and
complex challenges that we can take on.
How we manage not just one agent buta
whole array of agents in a symphony that
then does
great things foran enterprise,for a
society,for a group of people
for a bunch of friends.
And so
I'm really looking forward to see how
people build these orchestration systems in
a way that is safe, reliable, and
trustworthy.
Thanks so much.
Now that we have all the elements laid in
front of the table, let's try to make a meal
in a decent one withall this suggestion
andall these elements that
the panelists brought
up.
Let me start with Sarah that you mentioned,
you mentioned your paper, this low debt of
scaling andnow we have the rapid RISE of
an agentic AI and
I wanted to bring this from
a user perspective like what changes we can
expect when we're moving from just humans
or all of us using AI tools to humans
interacting and working alongside agents.
Yeah, and maybe to kick off I'll comment
because there was some fun topics there.
I want to just briefly touch on harnesses
because you know what's crazy?
Harnesses can either compound proprietary
advantages or they can open up.
Frankly,some harnesses thatproprietary
firms build don't work with
any other model but
that firm. So you have more lock in.
I think the question of harness is super
interesting because
so much of also what we're
seeing now, this push, the momentum in this
room is largely because in recent weeks we
have seen decisions to withhold certain
models
people have realized there needs to be a
diversity
of options and an ability to have a pool
of models for access.
So I think this forum is happening at a
very interesting time.
Key to thatif you care abouthow do you
leverage pools of models which
is much more akin to
our own intelligence by the way.
We all showed up here, we all showed up at
the same time.
Even intelligence is really individual,
it's much more collective, frankly.
But this idea of how to harness it,one
I'll say this,the fact that
there is no consensus
on how to do it is very interesting and a
general harness is typically built for all
tasks whichmeans it's very inefficient
token wise and
it's very inefficient on your task.
For me this is a, it's a meta optimization
problem.
I think that
a lot of what we'll see is like how do you
auto-learn the right harness for
the right task and
I think the burden placed on the user
right now is pretty extreme and
I actually think that needs to shift much
more to not placing.
Ideally a user isn't doing all the
acrobatics of today like massive prompts
trying to figure
out how to piece things together.
We should be auto-learning a lot of
thatand then just really getting on with
the user's
task. What is the place of how humans
should interact with agents?
So you know it's interesting because it's
actually pretty critical.
The two areas whichI've seen the most
development frankly I'm trained as
a computer scientist
have been code and design and I'll share why
because those had interfaces that we were
used to, that we typically use and we gave
a ton of feedback along the way.
All of the tasks are completely
underserved by current interfaces and
they instead present
it with a chat and a thumbs up, thumbs
down.
I see you know our vision is thatthe whole
stack should be adaptable but
for AI to work
for everyday tasks thatare outside of
computing and
design you have to have dynamic interfaces
that allow people to get feedback and
someone has to feel like the model
actually changes
real time when they give feedback.
Right now if you give feedback in a chat
WHO knows when that model will change?
Like you have to wait for the next version
and so I actually think for the first time
ever the most intelligent system will be
the one thatcares aboutinterface and
cares about
how people give feedback.
There are other computer scientists WHO
have the opposite approach right?
They believe in browser agents and
crawling how the internet is.
I frankly don't think that will be very
successful.
I think that we already know from tasks that
is where humans find interfaces useful and
are intervening frequently along the way
that
it's very possible to build systems that
will be useful and so I'm much more
interested in that.
Like how do we build dynamic adaptable
interfaces?
We do a lot of work on dynamic
visualizations,dynamic kind of tools which
is really to allow
humans to be in the front row and to be in
the driving scene.
Thanks somuch andalso thanks forraising
the issue of that
is I think he was an underlying
team of capacity, you mentioned the use of
token that of course is like the data, like
the GPU.
Yeah,it's kind of like sounequally
distributed and
the young guy you mentioned a very
important
aspect of talking aboutstack thatis the
hardware component and
of course it's not just
a software component butit's a hardware
component and
I'm talking again expanding on this stack
that you mentioned
I wanted to dive a bit deeper on what are
the technical foundation
that are the most critical to make sure
that
you can build an open source in agent
decay
models that are reliable but they are also
scalable.
Thank you, actually what I'm mentioned just
now is the concept about the open compute.
Because we do want a different model can
run on different hardware thatmeans that
if you
have more choice then you have the chance
to lower the price, right?
And also in today's very compressed
agentic system is not only the single model
you can
apply the different model, large model or
smaller size model for different purpose to
work together.
So that's why we think that to allow the
different hardware can support the different
model this is very important to make the
agentic system more scalable and
so this is very
important to the first point and the second
point actually is about the reliable, I do
think thatthe reliable on one hand is of
course because
the information security issue
then we need to consider sometimes
we need to consider how to deploy the
overall agentic
system together withthe model in the
proprietary way so
that's why we need to consider how
to put the model into different hardware but
on the other hand the reliable also means
for the how you benchmark verify it
andtoday we do see that
from the different kinds of
benchmark one is to develop the framework
to evaluate the successful ratio of the
completion
the second is the efficiency to finish the
task in terms of the time and the last is
how much token you will spend on this
agentic system to finish the task so
for different
angle it's also very important to consider
for the sustainable and also the reliable.
Thank you andsince you touched upon
verification let me turn to Mustaf and
also like echoing
what Trisha was saying that we live in a
claim-based AI world, what I wanted to ask
is what does two different things
actually,what does it mean verification for
the architecture
of AI agentic systems and
also just before getting on stage you
mentioned a new UN acronym
that is always good to learn thatis on
OSARA that
is open source agentic research
architecture
so maybe whileyou cover and
the verification you can also see a couple
of words on the
device absolutely so
for us to be able to have some kind of
accountability on the transactions
of the agents we need to be able to trace
the all the transactions back to the agent
the
source of all of thatand every single
transaction has to be in a way where
you cannot basically
change it after andyou can be able to
defend it in a way so
verification is the key here
if you cannot verify that
the agent done those things at this time
you are not going to be
able to trust it andthen you will have all
kind of problems down the line so
that's why
we have to get this right the identity
components of the agent this is something
thateverybody
is talking aboutit if you see any
futuristic design or proposed design for
the new harness
is always going to have that
identity component also going back to what
Sarah was talking
earlier about the human plus agent as a new
operating model moving forward I genuinely
believe thatthis is going to become the
reality not because
it's there's a choice this is
the best actually it's not it's not a
choice after going through
a whole lot of research
and this by the way I come froma very long
history of software architectures and
cybersecurity
framework development over the past soI
totally understand what the value is for
identity
and being able to verify that and capture
over time coming to us are as a part of the
work that
we are doing in the open source United is
a community of practice of the United
Nations responsible foropen source
projects and
facilitate all the work across the
different
agencies one of the initiative that
we just have is called a SARS opens open
sovereign
agent reference architecture is actually a
two tracks one is a specification
documentation
explaining what are the main components
inside the harness of the agent that
must remain
open andthere are others that
it could be open it could be restricted or
closed whatever
you want it it also separates the intelligence
source all the AI models outside it
treats
it like a battery in the car you can swap
it out anytime you want but
that's not going
to change the functioning of the actual
agent itself it also comes with
us all the protocols
and the different layers of the agent we
believe that
the person is going to have their own
personal agents the enterprise is going to
have their own agent the brain that
will be
functioning on their behalf eventually
also a G agent where
it will function on behalf
of all the different government entities
we had a roadmap like the entire thing is
probably
going to be become reality was in the next
two or three years even maybe longer I
don't
know butthe other part of that
is actually a document is called AI bill
of rights this
is documents almost like a policy or or
guidance if you would it explains all the
roles that
the person will have to do to take care of
their agent because
that's going to be representing
them also for
the enterprise what the responsibilities
they are if they're going to allow a person
to bring their own agent to work in the
future what are the different things that
they have
to ensure as far as compatibility goes and
then further and most importantly the role
of government in this area how are they
going to facilitate and
what are the building blocks
that they must have at the at the country
level in order to have or facilitate that
ecosystem
between all different types of of agents
some of the aspects of it already exist
today but
we were able to kind of put all
thattogether in a way that
it give you the design of the
car andalso the the roads andthe
dimensions andeverything in one go so
this way we don't
have that chicken and egg problem that we
have and right now was regulations and design.
Thanks and Tricia going back to you almost
a very important point that is eventually
the question always responsible forthe
actions that
agents all sorts of agents will be taking
and Tricia you cover the dimension of safety
so my question for you what we're hearing
the conversation of the UN from member states
from the private sector from stakeholders
and we are talking aboutopen source
andaccountability and
transparency sometimes there is almost
a money cam view is either open source
automatically creates a accountability to
transparency
or open source is terrible
foraccountability becauseof transparency so
if you could elaborate
on this yeah I mean this is a problem
that's been solved by the open source world
already
so I don't know why we have to keep like
litigating it becauseyou know like for
example enterprise
solved this you know there was a time
where
enterprise said oh we don't want to use
open
source becausewe haven't solved forthe
security stuff but
like the whole point of open source
is thatwe are able to inspect the code
andhow something was built but
what enterprises
had withtheir own security concerns and
so you know OSI red hat we have Linux
Foundation
everyone came together andthen we figured
out open core whereyou could fork it so
there
are ways andwe also learned them that
it is not binary it's not like if you
build open
you can't have things closed we know that
we can build closed on top of open I think
the challenge now is thatyou know we are
in the open source moment for
verification in
that what you know many you know people
did important you know open source leaders
did
in the late 90s is that
they came together they said hold on a
minute anyone now is saying
everyone is saying they run open source
you know thatterm is being used so
loosely and
this is history thatBrian Bellendorf you
know knows well and
taught me one of our advisors
and and they he and many others saw that we
have to come together and actually give a
definition andthere was a definition
that's already out there but
people had the community
had to come together andsay this is what's
open source yes or no and
then they were able
to figure out how to institutionalize it
and
create governance around it now we're in
that
moment forverification where
anyone now is increasingly starting to say
oh we do verification
but really what is verification how do you
know that you know this verification for us
I don't think it counts if it is not
independently viewable of the operator because
you cannot
trust that verification process and so this
is super you know important that right now
we're in this moment where
if we want to be able to trust what agents
did we need to be
able to see evidence butwe need to be able
to understand the nature of that
evidence and
we need we have to be able to trust it and
so we have to figure out how to define in
this moment and I'm excited to talk with
myself and my other panelists about this is
that how do we define verifiability right
now in the same way that
open source leaders
came together late 90s and you know it took
that kind of messy landscape and was like
gave a bit of order to make it publicly
definable commercially viable andprocurable
andlegally
defensible we're in this moment now it's a
little different and that open source was
easier to define right it was like either
yes or no you either met these conditions
it
was binary and
you're open source now there's stages
there's different types of verification
they're self-verifiably there's mutual
verification there's independently verifiable
there's cryptographically
verifiable there's centralized means to do
cryptographic verifications there's
decentralized means
so we have to as a community come together
now in this moment and this is why at the
advanced AI society we've launched you
know I'm excited we most often were talking
about
this of like the beauty of Asara whichI
taught me that
the word means essence the essence
and Arabic oh sobeautiful and
so what we're doing at the society is
called the proof of
control architecture whichis the technical
foundations for
verifiable AI to be able to
tell what how do you confirm an AI did
what it was supposed to do and
the purpose of this
architecture is that we have to be able to
find this in a way that makes sense for what
Sarah is talking aboutwhich is that
you know right now we have the messy part
of finger
at how do we use AI post-appointment and
this is this is why we're in the time of
AI governance
this is why AI policy is soimportant
because
we have to figure out how do we actually
trust
these things if we're gonna make AI
inclusive like you know I was saying right is
thatwe
have to develop governance around it of
how do you combine different AI models or
how
do you figure out these like tricky
questions of privacy andprotection and
I know we can
do this because
we've done this before we give power we we
trust agents all the time like
when you get on a plane I don't know how
many people came on a plane here but
we have developed
systems of trust and
verification to entrust someone else to be
an agent on my behalf every
time I get on a plane there's already been
I think a sort of you know like whatever
certification
training process thatthe whole industry
has gone through
and then if something fails there's
accountability there's insurance mechanisms
there's a way that the industry has price
risk andwe have not done any of that
yet it is literally being figured out
right now so
I think a lot of times you were very
critical of AI being like oh it like the
industry hasn't
figured out itself itself up butlike
things are moving quickly and
we are you know figuring
things out right now we are you know
unfortunately flying the plane and
you know trying to build
it at the same time I'm not saying it's
right but
it explains I think some of the messiness
and we should be realistic to say look we
haven't figured out the messy and
kind of boring
stuff around procurement around actuarial
science around this you know how do we
price
risk andgetting the insurance industry you
know withall these agreements and
governance
and nation-states involved soI think it
really makes sense right now wherewe're at
butyou
know really figure out safety we have to
agree on verification and
we have to agree on what
open verification looks like otherwise
everyone's just going to claim it and
we're not going
to get any farther along withhow do we
actually trust that
an agent acted on my behalf.
Thank you somuch andI guess it doesn't
harm to repeat some things that
are obvious and
I think that all of you being here you're
making the case for open source so thanks so
much for that.
Turning back to David andagain Tricia
something else thatyou were saying is that
again you
are always the conversation is always
about
what AI should do rather than what AI is
right
now soit pains me a bit to us this to
David but
based on what we're discussing what do
you think talking aboutan agent-based
systems and
what do you think are the main challenges
on a I would say medium term over the next
five years that
again it's an entire different
geological era in terms of AI butwhat do
you think are the main challenges that
it was.
Yeah well I'm going to I'm going to slightly
reframe thatI'll talk challenges and
opportunity
right.
The main challenges that
we're facing one of them is a
concentration of know how there
are maybe a couple of thousand people in
the world WHO
know how the most advanced systems
work andmost of them have been captured by
eight companies and
so what can we do to sort
of bring more skill andknowledge to a
greater array of people away from
that concentration
of know how more broadly one of the big
challenges is we have a hyper concentration
of intelligence
capital in in the hyperscalers right
sotoday as
of close of market yesterday they were
worth about
twenty five trillion dollars us by twenty
thirty three my forecast is they're
going to be somewhere between fifty two
trillion and
eighty trillion dollars of market
capitalization
and andso how can we sort of pull out more
value for
more people rather than have it be
in the handful of a few oligarchs andand
so
sovereign AI is I think part of the answer
to thatand and
so I'm very excited this is in the
opportunity space of how can we bring
more people working on sovereign AI out to
those hundred ninety three countries and
and
unlock the intelligence of entire
populations of entire countries soIndia for
example is
acutely aware of this right India rode the
outsourcing boom and and did very well off
of thatand now is facing the outsourcing
collapse and
from the federal government down
to the individual states is making a
concerted effort to retool the economy around
intelligence
Pakistan also my my former student a
doctor so
whole monier is is chairing the national
AI council asthey try and
reorient the entire economy around
intelligence in fact fifty
countries at least thatwere tracking are
building sovereign AI initiatives from
Sweden
to Singapore andmore should be getting in
on the act and
in one of the promises of sovereign
AI is that you can have the intelligence of
a population instead of all that know how
and knowledge and and that that increase in
economics that I talked about going into the
hands of you know an individual hyperscaler
magnificent seven plus one it'll now go
into
the hands of the people andthat's a really
exciting opportunity as
we conclude let's go
rapid fire I want to add one opportunity is
that I think in order as a as a mechanism
to get to this world that you've outlined
David is that there we have to get over the
opportunity in the challenge is we have to
get over this mindset that
you primarily use
only hyperscalers butI also think on the
other end all these kind of responsible AI
andethical
AI critiques of hyperscalers to tell
everyone to get off of them and
that they're bad and
evil I don't think that works either I don't
think you can penalize people for wanting
to use tools thatjust work you know I'm
sure you don't have enough transparency but
you
can't shame people andso one way to get
people there and
I think it's a mindset shift is
that we're missing the kind of design
mechanisms that
we're implementing at advanced AI society
is that it's we talk about this concept of
a portfolio AI approach and in the same way
that you would approach your financial
portfolio as
you know you don't put all your eggs in
one basket andjust like one company well
what's exciting about
companies now they're coming
up and that's why I've been looking at you
know so excited when I saw Sarah was on my
panel is thatI think companies like hers
andyou're going to see more is that
we're now
past finally okay we know there's the
frontier AI lab andhyperscalers but
there's actually
so many more companies you know partially
because
you know open source has allowed this
but a lot of great entrepreneurs are
starting to come up where
they're making all these
other companies for us to choose from so that
we can take a portfolio AI approach and we
can say hey based on as a nation state or
as an individual or as a company based on my
data needs my regulatory needs you know
what my use case is what my purpose is what
is
the best portfolio for
us in this business context or in my daily
life or use case and
how does thatchange and
we're going to see a lot more different
kinds of AI applications
it's going to you know look more inclusive
people are going to be mixing models and
so
I think we need to really move out of this
kind of like shame based idea because
that's
not going to work intosaying you know
there's all these companies like Sarah's and
others
that are coming companies in China thatwe're
just going to be able to choose from
around
the world andeveryone's going to have more
choices thank you so
much we're almost a time
but I wanted to check with
the panelists if someone is up quick some
job oh good I just
loved it everyone's at the ready all right
I'm so
sorry just just want to highlight one
thing here that actually when you architect
this new era of agent decay AI is you have
to have cyber security in your mind
software development in your mind and
architecture
and also cryptography at the core of
everything thatyou do if we don't get that
right from
the very beginning I don't think we'll be
able to get another chance at this for
another
30 40 years I was just I was really commenting
on everyone I had their finger at the
ready
I'll only say this honestly gatherings
like this were very depressing a few years
ago most
of the conversation was around oh open
source should focus on evals which
was absurd the
conversation is entirely different so the
mechanisms by which we can own intelligence
have dramatically changed part of that
is a shift at the rate of return or
compute but
part of it's aswell we're starting to
automate AI training itself and
AI optimization which
means barriers to entry are totally
different and
I think that's the main reason there's
so much momentum in this room and it's a
totally different environment from even a
few years ago soit's the right time
forthis forum andDavid go for
it yeah very quickly
since open source was pioneered let's
argue in the 1980s consistently what we've
seen is
on the one hand people are always going to
be paying for state of the art models that
are closed source expensive ones at the
top of the pyramid open source brings in
more
access andallows more people to take
advantage of the benefits of technology and
it's important
that we continue that work since today's
discussion is in about open source and also
in this United Nations building so
I want to say today actually if you look
at the overall
different countries the computation
installation 90% of them might be already out of
date to
support the latest model sothe goal forthe
open compute with
the open source is we want
the AI agent system can run on most of the
computation resources which
today might already
underutilized thatmeans that
we want to use those underutilized
resource deployed in the
data center to support the AI and also AI
agent system so that we can have the chance
to let the grow the whole global different
country developing country they can
benefit
for that actually in the past one year we
work together with the United Nations and
also the Africa Union to try to try that
this open compute for AI education for talent
and we provided this underutilized butfree
resource as
the online resources support the
Africa universities they can launch the
classes to teach their students so
that's very meaningful
for them to get our next generation ready
forAI soI think open source and
open compute
is very important forus to consider how to
expand the AI capacity and
make AI inclusive
thank you thank you somuch I know we are
running out of time but
just checking the room I wish
that the Q&A was slightly longer butthat's
the time we have we have time for
one or two
questions if someone wants to take the
floor please press on the mic I should be
able to
see the light andsee if I see any I see
one over there so
my question is primarily around
open me I can't ask you to introduce
yourself sure thank you sure my name is Berza
big and
I am from
Kindrel my question is primarily around
open hardware right it's it's really
great to hear aboutcryptography on this
forum andyou know we've been talking about
software
quite a lot I would like to hear aboutopen
cloud open hardware and
what kind of open stack
is available out there andwhat what the
committees are thinking aboutit thank you so
much any
other intervention I'm trying I'm seeing
let's go to my right thank you somuch for
a wonderful
session my name is Habib Nurbay I work as a
professor back home in South Africa and in
the context of research methodology a lot
of the data that we use if for example it is
not valid we would not classify it
asreliable so
in the context of open source data my
question
would be around the fact that if the data
is accessible if it's open and even if it is
very fireable how do we ensure thatthe
data that
we having access to in the open source
context would still be valid or reliable
in a similar context to research
methodology thank
you I think we might have time I see
forlast one myself Rajshaker I work for
a company
called Prezenius which
is health care plus medtech company my
question is regarding it's
open source AI right so but more and more
countries are going in the direction of data
residency butwhen you talk aboutopen source
AI forAI the bedrock is the data when
countries
are going in the direction of data
residency how you guys want to or at least I
would like
to get an opinion of the panel how it
works.
Thank you so much Trisha volunteered I think
for open hardware question I can take the
first one just to give you soto answer the
question of what's happening with
open source
or verify verify ability with hardware is
that there is a lot happening right now and
it's a great time forcryptographic work
that's andone of the things that
we're seeing with
verifiable AI some of our members is
thatyou can now do especially for
sovereign AI or
any sovereign AI needs is you can do provable
compliance sothis is a great time for
you
know governance forpolicymakers for
anyone WHO's trying to figure out how do
you figure
out where you are in the compute you know
in your queue for trying to get compute how
do you prove that your data was residents
in this specific geography how do you even
prove thatyour data was computed onto this
very chip right and
so we have members from
Lucid to equity WHO have or figuring this
out we can build out the entire data supply
chain andyou can track you know
cryptographically just tamper resistant and
you can check it's
independent of them you can confirm
thatthis data was computed here and
on this hardware
so I think there's a lot that's happening
in thatin that
area in terms of the intersection
of hardware andsoftware sothat's one
example and
may I ever more comment actually today
the software stats already there called
the flat OS actually it is built together
with
tens of different research institutes or
university and
also the enterprises together it already
can support the more than thirty three
zero different type of hardware and
we also collaborate
with the open source community like the
Linux Foundation PyTorch Foundation Eclipse
Foundation
this together so today I thank this for the
open computer open hardware I think we are
ready thank you I don't know if someone
else wants to come in fromthe pound so
the last
questions the answer is you can't there's
just no way and just to add to that I don't
know if you noticed butthe US issued an
order that
says we don't care if your data is
resident
in your country if it's operating on cloud
run by a US company we can look at it
that's
a problem sohow how we work forward
fromhere is really messy and
and the data ownership
data flow data providence question is one
thatwe all need to work on but
I'm not going
to even pretend that people have begun to
solve it because it just got a lot messier
this brings our panel to an end thank you
so much to all of you for being here and to
the panelists for the great presentation we
wish you all the best for the rest of the
week we have a fantastic program great
receptions and
the UN conversation on AI will also
continue
not only New York butin Geneva withthe
first AI dialogue that
will take place on the sixth
and seventh of July andI want to
acknowledge the Estonian minister and
in the room Estonian
and El Salvador are leading the efforts of
the first dialogue on AI governance and
open
source will be part of that conversation as
well thank you all and on to the fantastic
you can see pet peeve to transition to the
next session.
Thank you somuch I love whenever we're
doing tech events and
then there's technical issues
I think it's quite ironic thank you Felipe
for
finishing us off on time that's a miracle
whenever you attend UN events we're going
to start off in a minute or two with a very
exciting closing session solet me hand it
over to our dear colleague Medi again and
you
saw him earlier he graciously stepped into
moderator previous panel and he'll be back
on stage to introduce the speakers of the
closing session so over to you Medi.
colleagues, guests I'm very happy to wrap
up this open source first open source and
AI day at the UN and we'll be discussing in
very formal chat and formal chat with first
the U.
S.
A.
M.
and Deep Gill the enders in general
especially my wife for digital and
music technology Mr.
Alberto Gaggio the director general of the
Spanish agency for the supervision
of artificial intelligence is here and
her excellency Lizzie la Pacosta no Lizzie
la Pacosta
minister of justice anddigital affairs
from
the Republic of Estonia sorry if I'm
misspelled
any of your names so
I invite you all to join me on the
discussion microphone are not working
so we are getting the discussion in a very
formal setting for
a very informal discussion
while waiting for
the speakers will make it very short it
will not be a very long discussion
okay and I forget in early session.
and I forget in her excellency Gabriela
Gonzalez the dpr of Uruguay very sorry I'm
using all
notes I need to update I just need to
start using Google Docs or whatever I mean
things
that get updated automatically so today we
got a various sessions all along with today
we've been talking aboutrobots we've been
talking aboutthe future of AI with
the opening
keynotes we've also discussed the the
development of AI and
then we got a first of kind panel
with only women minister showing us the
pathway on how to develop the deal in real
way in
effective manner the three of them are
very excellent and
bringing some concrete results
in their country withvery impactful
tangible outcomes and
we discussed the robot we discussed
the agent andall these very complex and
technical subjects now we'd like to wrap
up this discussion
with some very insightful outcomes fromall
of you andthen I'll start with
a very simple
question forall of you whenfirst you heard
about
open source in AI what is the the
immediate
things thatyou are thinking aboutI'll
start with
our Spanish colleague please open source
and AI in few words for you so up to me it's
openness and transparency and I think those
are two major values thatwe need to to
include in our development of AI and
I also like the
previous speaker also said thatthere's
nothing wrong withcompanies trying to look
forthe
own economic benefits butthere is also
nothing wrong to ensure that
these economic benefits
are also supported by transparency
andresponsible development of technology that
protects the
rights of people.
Boss please, you are so very quickly for me
it is the usability the reusability and the
community dimension that you know you have
a community that has your your back.
Your Excellency.
Thank you I fully agree what has already
been said from Estonian side I would
add thatit is a governance issue it's not
a technical issue open source is something
thatyou
have to put on the table asa default
solution from
the governance side then only then you can
fulfill all the values and goals you are
looking for. Thank you.
Thank you so much for giving me the floor.
For us I'm gonna repeat also what is being
said by
the previous speaker Madam Minister and
the USG.
For us it's only not only a technical
principle
it's a strategic tool fortrust inclusion
innovation andinternational cooperation and
also open
standard open technologies
andcollaborative governance that
can help reach digital divide
across the countries and region from
developing and then developing countries also.
Thank you.
Thank you somuch andI'll stay with
that the bridging the gap I know how how
involved you are
in in thatmaking sure that
no country is left behind there is a
bigger force on the middle
outer level the global digital compact the
back of the future the the global
dialogue the the
panel there is a lot of efforts happening
at the UN from
a member state perspective do you think at
the thatopen source is getting enough
space how you see it that
think should be enforced within
the multilateral either within the
multilateral or how the multilateral could
enforce the open
source well it's never enough what we can
do to get bridges between regions and
using the open
sources but I think with the work that the
audit is doing is it's good we are going to
the good path of course we can improve
butfor that
we need many mandate we need also support
the
offices you know we have to create also
the tools in our own governance at the UN
forimproving our
work withthe withus the member state
butindeed is is needed and
I think we are in the right way
here working with the multilateral system.
Thank you so much UAG about the
multi-larand you see
it's your audit was cited what do you
think or that can do more?
Well get the tech to work better
always in the room withour colleagues
fromOICT but
I think today has been a good day a kind
of
the quality of the discussions the some of
the new topics thathave come in robotics
forexample
and the fact thatwe didn't lead with
the policy heavy agenda we allowed the
community to surface
its own insights its own concerns the
community of technologies so
in a sense we successfully
close the gap between some of these high-level
considerations andmultilateral forums
andwhat
is happening on the ground in terms of the
work of the people actually building
those systems
soI
think thatis the big lesson formultilateral
forums at a time of rapid change and
questions
about value add that we need to kind of
bridge that gap between the abstract and the
practical soyou know you saw with
the turnout today very strong member state
turnout in the
morning we had a panel with
three women ministers leading the digital
transformation in the countries
Jamaica Morocco andSierra Leone sothat
tells you something about
the potential the energy of this
week andwe had the keynote fromJan Lecun
WHOI thought you know gave us a lot of food
forthought
in terms of what's the direction of the
technology the different angles this
trajectory could take
and a very powerful lesson was thatwe
should have hope that
things could default to the small
the smart andthe distributed way of doing
things something that
the open source community knows
quite well andI totally agree withthe
distinguished ambassador fromUruguay about
the need foropen
standards open infrastructure
collaboration to be catalyzed through
more targeted work clear mandates
and adequate resources for the UN system.
Thank you so much Susie so let's see I
mean at the
at the multilateral level we need andit's
clear thatmore effort is needed but
what's at member state
level yeah I would say it the same member
states need interoperability within the
technological world
and thatmeans open standards andthat means
open source soit's simple as
this in Estonia we
have have had a fully digital state
already from1990s andwe know very well from
our experiences
that the system we have based on X-road
thatis an open source of course that
the interoperability
allows us to go further on withwhatever AI
solutions but
we have to be not vendor-locked
and thatis important forevery other country
aswell becausewe are a small country but
whatever
country in the world needs this
interoperability andopen standards and
let me give you just one
example in Estonia we have e-voting we
just celebrated 20 years of that
so national voting andlocal
voting is based on the technological
possibilities and
even this is basically open source audited
by
international independent auditors andthat
shows the possibilities we have with
open source
and open standards thank you thank you so
much Mr.
Rabezo we discussed about the open source
member
states multilateral UN butat the end we
need to implement thaton the ground and
I know that
you are leading a big effort in Spain or
around that
what does it really mean finally
concretely
to bring thaton the ground you think let
me also compliment the previous speakers
butI think
the first of all is that
open source it's a public policy or it
needs to be a public policy
member states whenwe are developing
technology that
it's basically serving the interest of our
ministries forexample we need to do thatin
cooperation with
open source communities because
that's the way to bring back control to
what is happening internally digitally
speaking
and then we need also to ensure that
the let's say the the public sector is
also putting forward
resources forthese technological
communities to get together and
to create more things andone
example of what we have done in Spain we
have created our own AI model which
is a train with
almost 20 percent of data in Spanish in
order to counterbalance the let's say the
the power
thatit
has commercial models frombig tech companies
thatare mainly trained in in in English
sothis
way we are able to somehow also reflect
the values reflect the history reflect the
nuances of our
language whichis Spanish and
it's also spoken across across the world
by 700 million people
so it's also encouraging member states or
states to put forward the resources that
can help these
communities create more AI system and
then if you if you allow me I think I need
to commend the
work thatthe we know thatis doing on on
this open source and
bringing international community
on open source here because
you guys matter what you have to say
matters very much to the multilateral
system andto the international discussions
that
we are having we are I mentioned in a
previous
in a member's intervention we are
gathering in Geneva about
the global governance of AI while
you have to say here needs to be also
translated intowhat member states discuss into
what ministers
discuss andheads of the government andof
the state andit's important thatwe do know
thatwe
close the graph the the gap thatwe build
bridges andthis is a great world that
you are doing and
needs to be to need needs to continue
thank you somuch sowe heard about
these different experience
I'm looking at the Uruguay experience is
this very siloed approach it sounds like
very siloed
approach every country bring their own
experience in building that
how the Uruguay is building
experience is there any digital
cooperation thatis framing that
experience building up on on on
that building open source inside of the
digital transformation digital cooperation
how it's being
framed in orbit sorry and
first of all cooperation is always
necessary that's it's an umbrella that
we have to work withbetween member state
andalso withthe civil society with
the all the companies
with the private sector socooperation is
not only needed inside the government and
with other
member state withyou here it's very important
thatit has to be back on forward and
feedback
because we can we have to talk aboutan
ecosystem andnot about
isolated a member state isolate
now have no sense because at the end what
we want is the benefit of our population
development more resources more connections
and technologies and emerging technologies
AI andthat are a challenge forus
especially if I'm speaking fromthe from
the global south
a token in national capacity asUruguay we
have create an agency to deal with
this matter that
is dealing withdigital agenda that
include digital government open government
cybersecurity
data governance digital citizenship
national strategies on AI data and
cyber security we also
understand thatdigital transformation is
not a journey that
countries should undertake alone
but as I said before you will have sought
to share this experience with international
cooperation including south south and
triangular cooperation in this regard we
participate also
with our agency of cooperation itself in
initiatives such as
agreement between Uruguay
the Dominican Republic andSpain financed
by the European Union which
support the creation of the
ICT of servitor in the Dominican Republic
the strength of Uruguay unobservatory
drawing on the
Spain digital development experience we
also work withthe our agency with
NDP supporting
implementation of the digital transformation
of our government our state reflecting
the
important of the partnership between national
institution international institution
cooperation
agency andthe united nation system andthis
experience show our openness that
openness is
not only a principle it's not a map of of
cooperation andI don't want to steal that
I want to speak
but thatis our more or less a genuine idea
thatour how we are working and
our conception of
cooperation in this area thank you this
sounds very inspiring forthe andthen for
the global
digital compact andthe digital cooperation
work we are leading hope that
this is a good example to
be taken intoconsideration andshowcases
becausefrankly this is the first time I hear
aboutthat
work you are doing sounds very great solet
me look at my colleague from
Spain you heard about
the cooperation of their way on on that
so that's it's coming it's being
implemented the digital
cooperation it's clearly the path for
for accelerating the uptake of the digital
transformations andAI
is the open source also what beyond the
digital cooperation a catalyzer for
the digital cooperation
absolutely I mean the model I just
mentioned is open source it's available to
everyone you can
download it you can improve it you can
upload it again with
your improvements you can specialize
it in different sectors this is something
that
we need to get the communities to work on
because
it's it's a public interest it's value for
everybody in particular Spain has been
working withwith
all the American countries in order to
ensure that
because you see Spanish has very very many
variants
the Spanish of what Uruguay is not the
same as
the Spanish of Spain or the Spain or the
Portuguese
of Portugal is not the same asthe
Portuguese of Brazil so
what we're trying to do is to ensure
that the mothers that
the system they can somehow build on our
history on our tradition on our
nuances of the languages butalso what we
are trying that
we need to go to the to the concrete
level of the problems that
that people have in their daily lives
meaning restaurants meaning
shops if how they are adopting AI how they
can create AI systems and
this the open source community
can bring a lot of value into it and at the
international level as well if you allow me
it's it's also important thatthere is more
andmore cooperation between countries
thatthe UN
serves asa meeting point forall of us
forexample Spain has supported they will know
thatin the
creation of the laboratory call AI
governance forhumanity that
is working on a number of areas
for the global dialogue on AI butit can do
much more it can go into
concrete solutions forcountries
that they don't maybe don't have compute
capacity or maybe they they need extra
extra support
andthen
this can be somehow an enabler of creating
more AI systems that
solve real challenges of countries
Thank you so much before going to USG I'd
like to question the minister
studying minister on you've been citing
the X-road project one of the most famous
project in Europe whenit comes to the data
I changed and
it was replicated across Europe and
then at some point it was even a question
of upscaling it at the European level I
know the
challenges you face on terms of data we
are talking aboutAI butdata AI with
no data there is no
no real discussion so
open data was one of the light motif of
building the X-road I'd like to hear
about all the bottlenecks more mostly on
bottlenecks issues that
you can see happening now thatwe
are moving intothe AI era withthe data
exchange whichbringing a lot more value into
the data
how do you think the future of the AI
X-roads?
Okay yeah X-road is an excellent extremely
cyber secure way of data interoperability
andit is perfectly suitable for
AI solutions because
it has not only like a pipeline between
different databases but
it includes computing capacity within
this pipeline andEstonia uses already more
than 200 government services based on AI
butyou
asked aboutbottlenecks andwe have always
been very open about
the mistakes we have been doing
throughout this long story so
if anybody is interested in mistakes then
you can just ask
Estonia and you get good lessons from us.
So one of the lessons was that we have
actually stopped
using all the sensitive data before the
sovereign solutions withAI because
the data protection
comes somuch important andturns to be the
absolute most important point that
there should
be no bactors the fools of rain solutions
for the sensitive data.
The second lesson learned
is something I think we face all together
andthis is thatin the democratic countries
wherewe value
very sincerely the rights of authors
abouttheir history books and
whatever other information
we actually see for
example the Russian bots spreading very
intensively the false information
and the propaganda to all the LLMs so
we are we all democratic countries are
facing a situation
where the bad guys are filling the AI
systems withthe propaganda and
false information that
might affect younger generations on a
totally wrong way andthe good countries WHO
are protecting
the offers rights andall these kind of
things whichare very important so
the LLMs are closed.
I was listening withall the pleasure the
Spanish example aboutyour history and
culture.
If we
can't find together good ways to fill in
the LLMs andthe systems with
accurate information
about cultures histories andnarratives
identities andagain about
histories then we are losing
our values we are losing our most sacred
feelings andunderstandings to the bad guys
andthroughout
the history this data falsification has
always been used to prepare the great wars
sothis is one of
the lessons learned that
we have to act in a different way to feed
the large language models
with not only different languages but
also the histories the cultures the sounds
the voices the
pictures the colors of each cultures and
and this is one of the reasons we very
highly appreciate
the work thatyou are doing at the United
Nations becausethis is the very right and
timely way to
operate but sorry now I had such a negative
information you asked about bottlenecks
maybe I will end witha positive note
sobecause we are so
widely using open source in Estonia
we have been able to first to protect our
cyber our cyber security is extremely
strong
and this is becauseof open source this is
one of the values and
the second thing is we have been
we have had the possibility to export
andupscale our solutions to 140 countries so
140 countries
in the world use the governments use some
at least some components of our open
source
sothis is
really thatwe are very proud of thank you
thank you so
much very insightful you heard there's a
multilateral happening at the small scale
how to take their upscale it at larger
scale
andensure
that no country is left behind when it
comes to this global digital cooperation
I think the global digital compact called
for
these partnerships this network
multilateralism
and it's interesting the examples thatwere
mentioned so
in the old days we used to call them south
south andtriangular cooperation south
south north you know Spain,Uruguay
Dominican Republic and
others the digital and
emerging technologies turn is making such
partnerships more interesting
and more possible soa concept fromthe past
is a re is being reborn in a good way
withthis
technological turn and that's why you know
some of the other examples you could
think of you know Estonia's X-road it
traveled through
the technical community to a much larger
setting whichwas India so
the data exchange layer in the India stack
is inspired by X-road
and the carrier of thatwas the open source
community the coding community so
these kind
of partnerships these unusual partnerships
and
sometimes you know some of this flows back
to the global north fromthe global south
so
those partnerships are becoming possible
now
they're encouraged by the global digital
compact andI think for
AI open source AI open development
AI in particular they will be crucial
because
computers scarce it is locked up in a few
geographies
it's costly talent is also highly
concentrated in a few places so
countries whether they are rich
or poor smaller big would have to network
to be able to access compute to be able to
develop their own talent and
perhaps work together on data sets pool
data sets share use cases if
something has worked in Estonia can it
work in another place if the Spanish
supervisory
agencies experience withstartups is
instructive foranother country so
these things can travel
through these networked approaches andthe
open source community can act as
a conveyor belt between
these different geographical centers thank
you so
much Susie yeah indeed there is a lot of
to be done and hopefully we can fill in the
gaps and then avoid when it comes to the AI
avoid the same issue that we face it when
it comes to the digital transformation
I don't know of a lot of about the digital
strategy of Uruguay but I heard that you are
also collaborating withSpain andthe
Dominican Republic so
that is an international cooperation
it looks like it's intothe DNA of the
strategy digital strategy but
the government strategy
how does it impact the decision making
process this design of the strategy what is
the component
of international cooperation thatis taken
intoaccount while
building all these national strategy
meaning being under constraint of sovereignty
being under constraints of lack of
computing
and all these things how this is taking
intoconsideration that
is a very wide question
but I can tell that
the government we have a central role in a
road to play we are not only
a regulator or we collaborate with
these ecosystems public investors the
standards center andmajor
user of technology throughprocurement
public policy international partnership as
you mentioned
government can steer innovation to work
their public interest this shows that
the openness is
not only aboutsharing technology butalso
sharing knowledge institutional models and
lesson learn
in the case of Uruguay becauseeverything
is connected andI know many of you are from
private
sector unfortunately I only see on you
open sources AI or something like that
next time we should
know better WHOI all of you in order to
also interact better but
for example in the case of
of Uruguay we export services we work we
have a very very small country in the south
for
those WHO doesn't know between Argentina
and Brazil and our trade is based on
Maine on food but also we export services
to a rounder world and especially to the US
so we have to collaborate withthe private
sector created the infrastructure and
the cooperation
in order also to have the capacity
building assistant to improve that
sector everything is
connected we have a role to play as
government to give the regulations inside
the government
but also collaborate withour partners in
the region but
also we can we since we have developed
for the last 30 years a good private sector
taking the hand of the government both
together
we can export this model in the region
sofor that
and even in the south we have different
stage of development in this area
sosometimes even we are not sodeveloped as
European Union
countries or in the level thatEstonia it
is we can also share our experience with
countries
like the Dominican Republic also we want
to do it with
countries in Africa to start to do
inter-regional cooperation butfor that
we also need partners like could be
members day like Spain
could be the UN system itself we also have
a lot of cooperation with
European countries even
with the EU asitself butalso withdifferent
members so
I think we are doing we try to do
not just within general withall the
technologies with
the whole umbrella all the merchant
technologies
and including AI of course and
of course regulation also the trying to
have an international
regulation of the cyber space taking
account with
the excellent mention before the bad use
of these technologies thank you thank you
so much that's very insightful and very
very impressive whether you've been saying
on this openness from
the way on Africa the Caribbean
origin South America butI think thatalso
the notion of south is a little bit moving
fromthe
geographical definition seeing some of the
north country coming to the south because
when it comes
to the AI they are very delayed and
then we will welcome them at the south in
the definition
but that's that's uh that's very very
impressive to see how the digital cooperation
is a strong
part of I want to add some please it about
what you mentioned developing countries we
must ensure
that we are not merely a consumer of
digital technology but
also active participants and
contributor andconcrete digital of digital
solutions even we we know that
not the main
contribution andthe main countries
involved companies involved when
AI are not a cup I think
with my fingers I can't count we also we
are we can collaborate andthe partnership
withthose
countries too yeah yeah we need to start
building that
indeed it's uh it's an imperative we will
be only consumer what we consider today as
very scarce and very available like the AI
probably will be more much rare in the
future and
it will be the access will be very limited
to all
the developed countries andthen we should
not reach thatpoint um from
the we get back to Estonia
because I know how advanced it and
then beyond the extra there many there
have been many attempts
also into
building the DPI stack building the open
AI there's a lot of uh listens to be
learned
from the Estonian experience the EVO I
remember whenfirst it was launched and
then all what
opened it behind it meaning the the ID
andall these elements andthe security and
the cyber security
if we we need to pack the the the stack or
the the thatvision and
make it open if we take the
the experience of Estonian say oh let's
make it open source what does it require
what does it need
how how to take it forwords but
also how to bring um member states to
adopt this kind of approach
or your solution or the way you have
designed your solution thank you as
I said in the beginning
I truly think it's we are talking about
the governance is you're not the
technological issue
so and that is where the agreement to find
the common space between the member states
is the work that United Nations can help
us all to find the common ground on that
and also to understand that
open source is very much not to be vendor
locked what you very rightly
said fromUruguay thatthat really our we
have a lot of countries that
are not extremely rich
we have to serve our people in the best
way andthis is globally extremely important
thatnobody
is left behind and
that we all have the opportunities to use
the artificial intelligence forthe good
of the people otherwise the speed is
sohigh that
there would be a total loss if we can't
solve this
issue soit is very very important thatwe
find a common ground here and
open source is definitely
useful for every company actually WHO does
it so this is something I think we can
learn fromEstonia becauseEstonian digital
path has been built knowingly from
the very beginning
already from1990s on the open source that
has been our political decision throughout
the governments
that open source is the solution by default
this is a political decision if we can
have this decision
spread andmade a little bit better example
for
public procurement in all the member
states
then we have a solid ground not to have a
vendor lock andthat already means that
we have a solid
ground forinteroperability of whatever
services whatever companies producing so
it is economically
good for the business side actually to go on
with the open source so that is our lesson
because of open source you have a possibility
to export to upscale thank you for
this wonderful
example from
India on the X-road this is exactly the
example if you use open source you can
upscale
from a country with1.3 million inhabitants
to your country which
is slightly bigger so
so this is the economical benefit that
is there of course we are all we all
understand the social
benefit the political benefit etc butthere
is a clear economical benefit as
well thank you
thank you so much Alberto just a kind of
technical question I know how Spain was
behind the AU AI Act then stronger in
building data that
that framework what is the part of the
open source in the AU AI Act butwhat meaning
the audience would be curious to know
aboutthat
and me too yeah no foreveryone to know the
the AU AI Act took for
the political agreement
36 hours 100 people in one single room in
order to agree on all the obligations of
the of the
regulation andand I was lucky to be there
withmy secretary of state in that
moment Carmatidas
WHO then came to be one of the corporate
coaches of the UN high level advisory board
andon the
regulation I I would like I mean since you
are putting forward this I believe there
is a message
that I would like everyone to take home
andits regulation doesn't stop innovation
andthis is
something that
is important if you do regulation properly
innovation doesn't need to stop and
what we did in the regulate in the AU AI
Act it was not to regulate AI it was to
regulate the uses
of AI that
significantly impact on the fundamental
rights of people or on the security of
people
or on the health of people andin that
regard what we finally regulated is 10 15
percent of
all of the AU systems thatare put in the
european market which
is a very targeted regulation and
we believe it's it's it's very it's a very
powerful one andwhen you come into
the open source open
source in general is excluded fromfrom
fromthe regulation aslong as
you don't put it in the market
so why is it excluded whenyou put it on on
hugging face on github because
there is transparency
possibilities there is a auditability
possibilities to do on those on the weights on
the model on the
on how the system was is operating and
that is giving this extra let's say
transparency or this extra
support in order forpeople to be able to
to work withsomething thatit's that
it's truly open
no then another thing is whenyou create
thatas a solution and
then you place it in the market
and then that
is actually affecting individuals then in
my if it's in a high risk sector it the
obligations will apply will start applying
butbecause there is so
much transparency you will
understand better how to construct the AI
system once you put it intodeployment
becausethe problem
and this is another problem thatwe see is
thatfor example withmodels with
this the big models
that are now available to what extent can
we ensure that
there is no bias in how the data how the
model was trained was training was was
training withthat data so
if you don't have access to that
information how are you ensuring thatyour
system does don't does not discriminate so
this is an
important in an important aspect thatwe
thatwe look into
when we regulated AI in Europe andwe
believe thatopen source it helps bring
this problem to a lesser extent thanks so
much because
we we don't have a lot of time medicine
I'll go for
a very quick question yeah I see very
quick
question you're sorry I'll give you the
final the final question sofor you for
for your
Excellency on the final words regarding
what is the openness what how these openness
you what is
your your perceptions of the openness in
in the in the lens of the AI anddigital and
digital
transformation and if you can give us a
closing sentence of thoughts regarding that
another thatjust referred to AI in general
open source forus asI'm speaking now from
the national
perspective fromthe south andyou asked me
from
37 earlier well I'm not going to speak on
the
whole on behalf of all of them butfrom us
butI see fromour perspective from
the south openness
is not enough it's not accompanied by
capacity building investment cyber security
data readiness
complete capacity financing andprivate
andprivate cooperation as
I mentioned at the beginning of
this closing remark government have a
central role asregulator investor and
the standard
center the consistent building andusing of
the technology but
if you allow me one minute more
the three closing messages thatI would
like to share withyou it's also that
first openness
can democratize the digital transformation
secondly must be grounded in trust
security human right
and responsible governance andthird that
you have also asked me earlier openness
required
cooperation no country or sector can build
the digital future alone not even the UN
or a country
or a region or a political system that
you we need to work all together the goal
is to move from
a fragmented digital solution to share
ecosystem fromthe present fromour perspective
fromdependency
to capacity from digital divide to digital
cooperation openness should be the pathway
to share progress ensuring innovation
became a force of development dignity and
opportunity
for all of us thank you very powerful
thank you so much very powerful message
or you know whether we are taking with
us after the session minister wait if we
the same question
or regarding the openness I mean we started
withwhat is open in AI or open AI and
what is the openness
openness is a ground fortrust and
without trust the digital world democratic
digital world is not
possible soeverything has to be grounded
related built on trust and
that is again a governance
issue andtrust is needed soobviously
thateven when
I'm usually against bureaucracy I fully
agree
with my Spanish colleague thatyou need
some kind of regulations to build trust and
then you can
build a lot of innovation on these
regulations because
if we share some of the regulations
then you can build whatever innovation on
thatand this is again one of the issues
wherewe trust
united nations to build trustable
agreements at least agreements where
the innovation can be
built on andopenness is somuch related
with
trust it allows controllability it allows
interoperability
I fully agree what my colleague fromUlga
said butthe center focal point is trust and
trust
with the AI issues and it's moving so fast
we have to act much more faster thank you
thank you so
much well deserved of course there are
better in 30 seconds okay it's trust on
people
but it's also legal certainty forinnovators
andthat is very important because
you know what is
going to happen if something works wrong
becausethere are rules and
then you you can rely on those
rules so
legal certainty it's super important in
order to make your commercial offer really
viable andreally scalable andI think this
is what regulations like the AI Act and
the work that
Estonia andSpain we are doing also in
making AI responsible is so
important to be based on those
to be less trust and legal certainty for
innovators thank you so much
UAG you heard aboutall the calls forthe UN
I will let you close this session and
close the day please
thank you there's a few words between you
andthe reception I think I agree with
whatever has
been said there's not much I can add there
I think the call foraction for
us is to ensure
inclusion in our own processes work very
hard forthat andthen promote openness which
leads to
trust trust which would hopefully lead to
adoption and applications and hopefully those
applications would be done in a way in a
well-governed way so that they
lead to impact forthe maximum number of
people on this planet positive impact so
thank you for
a wonderful wonderful day today thank you
foryour presence here and
looking forward to seeing you
at the reception
thank you very much andsee the microphone
works again I think it's because
the USG said we have to
fix it sothank you very much forthe whole
day socan we do our round of applause for
the audience
for sticking throughthe whole day it's not
easy in these windowless rooms so
as was mentioned by
USG there's a reception that
will be on the fourth floor unfortunately
there's limited capacity so
please check your badge if there's a
sticker you'll have priority so
please make your way to the
fourth floor and then see you there thank
you